[Guest 2]: I had a strange dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I saw my wife in a dream.
[Amit Varma]: Now this is unusual by itself, who dreams about this pals?
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, in my dream, I was in an amorous mood and I went into my bedroom hoping to interest
[Amit Varma]: my lovely wife in some playful interaction.
[Amit Varma]: She was curled up on the bed, laughing to herself in a way I only see when she is laughing
[Amit Varma]: at my jokes.
[Amit Varma]: She had an electrode plugged into her brain.
[Amit Varma]: I opened my mouth to say something, and she held up her hand and shushed me.
[Amit Varma]: I don't need to talk to you anymore, she said.
[Amit Varma]: There is no longer any need for any actual physical interaction between us.
[Amit Varma]: What are you talking about, I said?
[Amit Varma]: How can you say such a thing?
[Amit Varma]: Don't you love me anymore?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I love you very much, she said.
[Amit Varma]: But now I have an enhanced version of you.
[Amit Varma]: I uploaded your brain on this device a week ago when you were sleeping, and now there
[Amit Varma]: is an AI version of you here which makes even better conversation than you do.
[Amit Varma]: It has all the good things about you, your wit, your knowledge, but none of the bad stuff
[Amit Varma]: like your inflated sense of self-importance, your lack of empathy, your short attention
[Amit Varma]: span.
[Amit Varma]: You are Amit 1.0.
[Amit Varma]: This is Amit 2.0.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, damn, I had always feared this day would come.
[Amit Varma]: But that's just conversation, I said.
[Amit Varma]: What about the physical stuff?
[Amit Varma]: What about cuddling?
[Amit Varma]: Ha!
[Amit Varma]: She laughed.
[Amit Varma]: That's also sorted.
[Amit Varma]: See, Amit, people are a technology to make you feel a certain way.
[Amit Varma]: When you hug me, oxytocin floods through me.
[Amit Varma]: Well, now I can replicate the firing of neurons that leads to that without actually having
[Amit Varma]: to hug an actual human.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, over the last few weeks, I have saved all my experiences with you into the hard
[Amit Varma]: drive right here.
[Amit Varma]: Now I can replay them any time I want and even tweak some details.
[Amit Varma]: I don't need you at all.
[Amit Varma]: I was very sad when I heard this.
[Amit Varma]: I started pouting, but as my natural resting face is a pout, I must have looked the same.
[Amit Varma]: OK, fine, I said.
[Amit Varma]: I understand.
[Amit Varma]: I apologize for intruding.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just go and record next week's podcast now.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to, she said.
[Amit Varma]: It's done.
[Amit Varma]: I'm listening to it now.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about me in your intro.
[Amit Varma]: How sweet.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Guest 2]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badmaa.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I'm going to be talking about artificial intelligence, which is changing
[Amit Varma]: the world around us, mostly in good ways.
[Amit Varma]: Unlike some alarmists, I have nothing but positive feelings about A.I.
[Amit Varma]: I have two guests on the show today who share my optimism, but are also aware of both positive
[Amit Varma]: and negative unseen effects of artificial intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Ramesh Naam is a renowned futurist and award-winning science fiction novelist.
[Amit Varma]: He works at the Singularity Institute, and I urge you to Google him and read some of
[Amit Varma]: his essays on A.I.
[Amit Varma]: Also on the show today is Pawan Srinath, my colleague at the magazine Pragati, who has
[Amit Varma]: studied some of the public policy implications of A.I., such as universal basic income.
[Amit Varma]: Ramesh and Pawan, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Guest 1]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Ramesh, you've written a lot about artificial intelligence, and I've been reading a lot
[Amit Varma]: of your stuff and it's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, especially in India, there's a fear that people have about artificial
[Amit Varma]: intelligence, that it's going to decimate jobs, especially in the service industry,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Amit Varma]: And like at one level, the scene effect of artificial intelligence creates enormous value.
[Amit Varma]: And it might seem the unseen effect is a job loss, but to a lot of us here in India, the
[Amit Varma]: job loss is also sort of the scene effect.
[Amit Varma]: What are we missing?
[Guest 2]: What's the bigger picture here?
[Guest 2]: Well, I think the dialogue is pretty far ahead in India, if you're already talking about
[Guest 2]: job loss from automation.
[Guest 2]: I do think we should just acknowledge for a moment that the big obvious effect of A.I.
[Guest 2]: and digital technology in general is lots of wealth creation and lots of deflation of
[Guest 2]: the cost of services that were once impossible.
[Guest 2]: We all have more access to information than any U.S. president before Bill Clinton, let's
[Guest 2]: say, basically for free.
[Guest 2]: So that's amazing.
[Guest 2]: Amazing, right?
[Guest 2]: Now, will A.I. destroy jobs?
[Guest 2]: Who knows?
[Guest 2]: I would say it will destroy some jobs for sure.
[Guest 2]: But overall have a macro effect of destroying jobs.
[Guest 2]: I am cautious about predicting that because it's been predicted so many times that A.I.
[Guest 2]: would destroy jobs or that automation would destroy jobs in a macro sense.
[Guest 2]: And it hasn't ever been right, at least not for the long term.
[Guest 2]: I'll give you an example of that.
[Guest 2]: We'll answer your question eventually.
[Guest 2]: I'll give you an example of that is Ned Ludd.
[Guest 2]: The Luddites are named after him.
[Guest 2]: Ned Ludd may or may not have actually existed.
[Guest 2]: We don't really know if he was a real person or not.
[Guest 1]: Fake news.
[Guest 2]: Ned Ludd might be fake news.
[Guest 2]: But he apocryphally destroyed artificial weaving machines because he thought that they would
[Guest 2]: take jobs from weavers and textile workers.
[Guest 2]: But the invention of those machines actually increased demand for textiles so much that
[Guest 2]: more people were employed in the industry 10 years later than had been before they were
[Guest 2]: around because they brought down the price of textiles that made clothing much more affordable
[Guest 2]: and that spurred demand.
[Guest 2]: It was a positive some sort of thing.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: So we have some humility about predicting the future.
[Guest 2]: But let's imagine that it does destroy some jobs.
[Guest 2]: The example you and I were talking about last night is Norman Borlaug.
[Guest 2]: Norman Borlaug started the Green Revolution in the 1940s.
[Guest 2]: He bred better wheat and better rice that doubled crop yields around the world, helped
[Guest 2]: save India from massive famine, saved Mexico from massive famine.
[Guest 2]: They say he fed a billion people, saved a billion lives, maybe more than anyone in history.
[Guest 2]: Borlaug grew up in sort of a poor town in Iowa in the US.
[Guest 2]: He had no electricity, no running water.
[Guest 2]: And the reason he is who he is today is that he would have grown up to just be a farmer
[Guest 2]: following in his parents' footsteps.
[Guest 2]: But his family was able to get a Ford mechanical tractor.
[Guest 2]: And that Ford tractor destroyed Borlaug's job of being a menial laborer on the farm.
[Guest 2]: But that let him go to high school, not even university, high school.
[Guest 2]: And that led to him having the skills to combine new ideas to produce these better crops that
[Amit Varma]: feed us all.
[Amit Varma]: That changed the world.
[Amit Varma]: And made him a hero in India.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I'm always an evangelist for technology.
[Amit Varma]: To me, the unseen effect of more technology is always positive.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you might see some immediate job loss in the short term, if at all, but so
[Amit Varma]: much extra value is created that it goes back into the economy and the world is better off
[Amit Varma]: than it was before.
[Amit Varma]: It's a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: What I don't have answers to and what people often ask me is in the specific Indian context
[Amit Varma]: where we are, where we as a nation, we're growing younger and younger, we have a million
[Amit Varma]: people coming into the workforce every month, and there simply aren't enough jobs getting
[Amit Varma]: generated for them.
[Amit Varma]: And what I see happening is that a lot of our service industry is low-end kind of services
[Amit Varma]: which can easily be replaced by AI, and it's already started happening.
[Amit Varma]: And plus, while we never had a manufacturing industry because of our labor laws and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: that is a non-starter now simply because automation won't allow it to happen.
[Amit Varma]: So now, I understand that in the long term, great things will happen, and I also buy your
[Amit Varma]: point about having humility about predicting the future because the future is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: full of unknown unknowns, as it were, in this case.
[Amit Varma]: So no one can possibly, no one could have predicted at the time Balogh's parents bought
[Amit Varma]: a tractor that it would lead to the Green Revolution.
[Amit Varma]: That was an unknown unknown.
[Amit Varma]: But before the long term comes, we got to deal with the short term sort of social unrest
[Amit Varma]: that is likely, the demand on policy makers to somehow ameliorate this is likely.
[Amit Varma]: And when people ask me all this, I really don't have any answers anymore.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: It is complex, and there are parts of it that are really scary.
[Guest 2]: We know whether or not the macro job destruction happens.
[Guest 2]: We know that micro job destruction will happen.
[Guest 2]: In the U.S., we talk a lot about truck drivers.
[Guest 2]: In most U.S. states, truck driver is the most common profession, but those might be automated
[Guest 2]: away in the next 10 years, even if it goes very slowly, maybe 20 years.
[Guest 2]: So what do they go do?
[Guest 2]: There's about 3 million people in the U.S., about 1% of the U.S. population drives a vehicle
[Guest 2]: for a living.
[Guest 2]: And I see a lot of people in India that do that as well.
[Guest 2]: So maybe, and I'm optimistic about this, the total number of new jobs created by technology
[Guest 2]: will be much larger than the number that are destroyed.
[Guest 2]: But still, what do you do with those people?
[Guest 2]: I hope for a couple of things.
[Guest 2]: I hope, one, that technology that's disrupting driving or that's disrupting music or newspapers
[Guest 2]: might also disrupt education.
[Guest 2]: So MIT, one of the world's top universities, has said they will make all of their curriculum
[Guest 2]: available for free.
[Guest 2]: We have AI in video games that knows how skilled you are and plays just hard enough for it
[Guest 2]: to be an engaging experience for you and, in fact, makes it addictive.
[Guest 2]: Could we have AI tutors in your phone, in your tablet, that have access to all of this
[Guest 2]: curriculum that know what questions you're getting right and wrong and tailor the education
[Guest 2]: for you in a way that no human teacher with 30 or 40 kids could do?
[Guest 2]: That sounds like science fiction, right?
[Guest 2]: But it was science fiction for a robot to be driving a car just 10 years ago.
[Guest 2]: So if we do that, is there a chance we can take children throughout the world that maybe
[Guest 2]: don't have good schooling and give them amazing schooling, far better than now, for pennies,
[Guest 2]: billions of them, and even take adults who are taxi drivers?
[Guest 2]: They might not have the same ability to learn new skills, but I'll bet we can retrain them
[Guest 2]: into some new jobs if we deploy this sort of technology for them.
[Amit Varma]: So let me play devil's advocate for a moment.
[Amit Varma]: A government policymaker, say 10 years down the line in India, might well say that, look,
[Amit Varma]: I buy that technology as a whole is a great thing, but I can approach different aspects
[Amit Varma]: of it differently.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if truckers across the country are losing jobs, I can ban self-driving cars
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, tax them or whatever, and I can let the education happen.
[Amit Varma]: It's not as if I have to have the same approach to a disruptive technology and to technology
[Amit Varma]: which clearly does the kind and I absolutely share your optimism on the online education
[Amit Varma]: bit.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, at a policy level, if it's approached like that, and even in the popular imagination,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, populism dominates the world today.
[Amit Varma]: I don't see it very far, like for the same reason, like, for example, some of Trump's
[Amit Varma]: victory is definitely due to job loss, which he attributes to a jobs being shipped overseas
[Amit Varma]: and be immigrants coming and taking the jobs and a significant chunk of them are because
[Guest 2]: of automation.
[Guest 2]: How long before the anger goes in that direction?
[Guest 2]: I do think unrest is a real issue.
[Guest 2]: I do think people see their way of life changing and they have economic anxiety, the sort of
[Guest 2]: a hollowing out of the blue collar workforce in the US, the manual laborers that used to
[Guest 2]: work in manufacturing and so on.
[Guest 2]: Service jobs are vulnerable, but they have not been hurt as much so far.
[Guest 2]: I think India does have some vulnerability there.
[Guest 2]: So you have to figure out how to deal with that.
[Guest 2]: And I think part two is you have to have a social safety net.
[Guest 2]: You have to have some way to say, okay, if your job has been destroyed, we are going
[Guest 2]: to take care of you for a while with incentives for you to learn something new that is valuable
[Guest 2]: to society, that that should be the number one thing that we ask someone to do if we
[Guest 2]: are taking care of them when they're not employed is we should ask them to learn fundamentally.
[Amit Varma]: Pavan, Ramesh mentioned the social safety net and you've been reading and thinking and
[Amit Varma]: writing about universal basic income, for example, among other things.
[Guest 1]: What are your thoughts?
[Guest 1]: I think universal basic income seems to be the latest idea in welfare that has picked
[Guest 1]: up speed.
[Guest 1]: The idea has been around for a while, various flavors of it have existed.
[Guest 1]: There's the idea of a negative income tax, for example, and I think it's good that this
[Guest 1]: discussion is happening in the United States because I think they are prosperous enough
[Guest 1]: to have that conversation.
[Guest 1]: In India, even if you take the pie, you redistribute it, you get rid of administrative costs,
[Guest 1]: you get 3,000, 4,000 rupees per person per year, if pushed, maybe 20,000 rupees per
[Guest 1]: person per year.
[Guest 1]: And when you're providing that as cash and you don't have public goods that are available,
[Guest 1]: then your efficiency in using that cash is very limited.
[Guest 1]: You don't have a road to travel on, you have the money to buy a scooter now, but that's
[Guest 1]: not going to help.
[Guest 1]: So I think our conversations have to be a little different and I want to ask a question
[Guest 1]: on this.
[Guest 1]: I think one of the ways to ameliorate economic anxiety on this is when people can think of
[Guest 1]: easy first entry jobs that can be created in this new space.
[Guest 1]: If I'm looking at what's happening in India over the last five, 10 years with e-commerce
[Guest 1]: becoming a big thing, with new startups sort of achieving scale, is that you have a lot
[Guest 1]: of these jobs that people can quickly get into.
[Guest 1]: You're a driver, you're a delivery guy, you are in many other places and these are being
[Guest 1]: created rapidly.
[Guest 1]: So one of the reasons why startups have worked in India so far is while they have hit at
[Guest 1]: disrupted old businesses, they've disrupted the black and yellow taxi cabs in Mumbai,
[Guest 1]: but they've also created these jobs.
[Guest 1]: So there's a new constituency of people who are batting for them.
[Guest 1]: So in AI, Ram, do you see any opportunities for such jobs?
[Guest 2]: I think we do.
[Guest 2]: And I would say that here's a slightly more sophisticated way to think about job destruction.
[Guest 2]: Most of the time, automation does not destroy a whole job.
[Guest 2]: What it does is that a job is a basket of tasks.
[Guest 2]: Let's say your job has 10 tasks.
[Guest 2]: Let's say you are a delivery man.
[Guest 2]: Some of your tasks is you walk in to the restaurant and you get the food, you walk back out, you
[Guest 2]: know the address, a bunch of your job is you drive there, and then another part of your
[Guest 2]: job is you get out, you walk up to the house, you knock, you give the person their food,
[Guest 2]: collect the money.
[Guest 2]: Well, technology might automate away the driving part, but that last, not even the last mile,
[Guest 2]: the last hundred meters is actually quite difficult to automate away.
[Guest 2]: And drones, we can have fantasies about the taco drone all we want, but it just doesn't
[Guest 2]: make a lot of economic sense for some time.
[Guest 2]: And we see that in a variety of other things.
[Guest 2]: In white-collar work, in service work, we see the same thing.
[Guest 2]: So I'll give you an example of something not in the tech industry.
[Guest 2]: Being a lawyer in the U.S., one of the large things that you do in a big, complicated case
[Guest 2]: is discovery.
[Guest 2]: What is discovery?
[Guest 2]: Reading through thousands, or hundreds of thousands, or millions of documents to find
[Guest 2]: something interesting.
[Guest 2]: So now we have AI that can automate, can semi-automate, can make that part of the job the most boring,
[Guest 2]: least fun, least intelligently demanding part of the job, much more streamlined, and it
[Guest 2]: can free up the attorney to do the most important parts, the negotiation, the arguing in court,
[Guest 2]: and so on.
[Guest 2]: So I actually, I'm not sure that in many of these cases that we'll see people just go
[Guest 2]: away.
[Guest 2]: But the truckers that I talked about, if that trucking job is automated, you still have
[Guest 2]: someone that needs to refuel that vehicle.
[Guest 2]: You still have the people that need to load and unload it.
[Guest 2]: Some of that will be automated, not all of it.
[Guest 2]: You are reducing the cost of shipping goods.
[Guest 2]: That will probably, in turn, increase the demand for shipping goods.
[Guest 2]: And the way that textile demand went up when the price went down, that, in turn, will create
[Guest 2]: ancillary jobs.
[Guest 2]: So that's what I see, and I can't tell you exactly what that looks like.
[Guest 2]: But I think if, for instance, if India had fully autonomous vehicles, every single one,
[Guest 2]: A, the traffic would move five times faster, right?
[Guest 2]: And what economic surplus does that have for everyone in India?
[Guest 2]: And B, will that actually create more demand for delivery services that employ a human
[Guest 2]: in some way?
[Guest 2]: Maybe the human has to do four other tasks during the drive, but he's still going to
[Guest 1]: do something.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: And how do we get this exact analogy just with Uber and Ola in India?
[Guest 1]: If you had to be a taxi driver in an Indian city, say, 15 years ago, you needed to know
[Guest 1]: the city first, right?
[Guest 1]: You needed a geographic map of the city.
[Guest 1]: You needed a mental map of this.
[Guest 1]: And now, because Google Maps has automated that, any first-time driver, so long as they
[Guest 1]: know driving and they know the rules of the road reasonably well, they can just get on
[Amit Varma]: the road.
[Amit Varma]: It's going to be easier for people to become drivers and, you know, therefore increase
[Guest 1]: jobs in that space.
[Guest 1]: So, like you said, if certain tasks that require extensive experience or training become obvious
[Guest 1]: with the use of technology, maybe some jobs might increase in certain sectors.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: Maybe the future of meal delivery is going to be that it's a mobile kitchen and the person
[Guest 2]: is – the work they're doing is they're cooking inside while it's driving automatically from
[Guest 2]: each place to each place.
[Guest 2]: I don't know.
[Guest 2]: I'd like to come back to the universal basic income, though, because when I do the math
[Guest 2]: – I just do the math in the back of the envelope – what I come to the conclusion
[Guest 2]: of is we should talk about basic income and not universal basic income.
[Guest 2]: Because if you target it at the bottom 20% of society, let's say, you get five times
[Guest 2]: as many rupees that you can spend on those people.
[Guest 2]: So I think we should think of it as a safety net, something that phases out gradually and
[Guest 2]: slowly with income rather than being universal.
[Guest 2]: There's various arguments for universal that gets more politically popular if everyone
[Guest 2]: gets some, but it's just not as efficient.
[Guest 2]: I don't need that income myself.
[Guest 2]: I would rather that a poor person gets more than I do.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: I think the argument in favor of a universal anything is that the cost of targeting might
[Guest 1]: and the challenges of mis-targeting might outweigh the cost of universalization, and
[Guest 1]: I think with technology that might be proven wrong.
[Guest 1]: We'll need to see how Aadhaar and other things in India can be deployed meaningfully to make
[Amit Varma]: targeting successful.
[Amit Varma]: What Aadhaar will do is it will provide universal surveillance.
[Guest 1]: So while we're looking at that angle, I think the original purpose of the Aadhaar was how
[Amit Varma]: do we manage horribly bloated subsidies in India, how do we get the targeting right,
[Amit Varma]: how do we make sure the right guy is…
[Amit Varma]: I fully agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So let me end by asking a question of what could either be a utopian or a dystopian future.
[Amit Varma]: Now typically we imagine that, you know, whenever new technology comes, it might cause short
[Amit Varma]: term micro job losses, but it creates value and that value goes back into the economy
[Amit Varma]: and that creates more jobs.
[Amit Varma]: Now what happens in a future scenario where artificial intelligence and automation together
[Amit Varma]: can essentially satisfy every human need, right?
[Amit Varma]: And in which case whatever value is created goes back into AI and automation because any
[Amit Varma]: need that any human can have is possibly satisfied.
[Amit Varma]: Now the dystopian vision is that, my God, there are no jobs and what are people going
[Amit Varma]: to do?
[Amit Varma]: And we need to protect the people and the utopian vision is that everything will be
[Amit Varma]: so cheap because productivity is so high that people don't need jobs.
[Guest 2]: Where's the balance, I mean?
[Guest 2]: So I think people do like having a purpose in life.
[Guest 2]: So we have to worry about that and also expect that people will look for a purpose in life.
[Guest 2]: But I also become very, very cautious about predictions like this.
[Guest 2]: John Maynard Keynes, arguably the greatest economist of the 20th century, predicted that
[Guest 2]: in the USA by today, actually like 2000 I think, people would work an eight-hour work
[Guest 2]: week because he said per capita income grows at 2% per annum and so by 2000 everyone should
[Guest 2]: be able to work eight hours and have a good quality of life.
[Guest 2]: I wish he meant a 1920s level quality of life.
[Amit Varma]: And in the U.S.
[Amit Varma]: I wish they could get with eight hours of work.
[Guest 2]: Maybe you could work eight hours and have a 1920s quality of life, but no one wants
[Guest 2]: to.
[Guest 2]: Almost.
[Guest 2]: A few people do.
[Guest 2]: Human needs expand.
[Guest 2]: I'll tell you just from my country, because I know the stats, the living space per capita
[Guest 2]: in the U.S., number of square meters per capita, has gone up by a factor of three since 1970.
[Guest 2]: Right?
[Guest 2]: Why?
[Guest 2]: Because people, given the option, like space.
[Guest 2]: The number of miles flown per capita has gone up by a factor of like 20 since 1970.
[Guest 2]: People like to travel.
[Guest 2]: So human needs are not so easily satisfied.
[Guest 2]: Some people would view that as a horrible thing.
[Amit Varma]: I view it as a sort of a positive.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe we all need to go to Mars.
[Guest 2]: Elon Musk might think so.
[Amit Varma]: For now, guys, thank you for coming on the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: It was a pleasure talking to you.
[Guest 1]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening so far into the show.
[Amit Varma]: In a future age, this podcast will be uploaded directly to your brain.
[Amit Varma]: For now, though, we live in the cumbersome physical world where I urge you to head over
[Amit Varma]: to your nearby online or offline bookstore and pick up any of the books written by Ramesh.
[Amit Varma]: His award-winning Nexus Trilogy, in particular, is a blast to read and very, very thought-provoking.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan and I both write for Pragati at ThinkPragati.com, and you can also check out my blog, IndiaUncut
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com.
[Amit Varma]: Do come back for more next week.
[Amit Varma]: Long after humans have become post-human, the seen and the unseen will keep coming at
[Amit Varma]: you week after week after week.
[Unknown]: Next week, on the seen and the unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Pranay Kotastane
[Amit Varma]: about centrally-sponsored schemes.
[Unknown]: He profiles LGBT people from all across the country, and some of the stories are really
[Unknown]: poignant.
[Unknown]: Check it out.